Paul, an apostle, not by men, neither through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead; and all the brothers who are with me, to the churches of Galatia: grace to you, and peace from God our Father and the lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
I am amazed that you have so soon been carried away from him who called you in the grace of Christ, to another gospel; because there is no other; unless there are some who are troubling you, and want to trun the gospel of Christ upside down. But although we, or an angel from heaven, proclaim anything else, except the Good News which has been preached to your, let him be accursed. For, just as we predicted, and I say now again; If anyone should come with any so-called gospel, except that which your received, let him be accursed. For do I now try to persuade men or God. Or do I seek to please men. If I was still trying to please men, I would not be a servant of Christ. For I want you to know, brothers, that the Gospel that I preached was not according to men; for neither did I receive it or learn it from men, but through the revelation of Jesus Christ. For you have heard of my former behaviour at one time in Judaism, how I persecuted the church of God beyond measure, and tried to destroy it. I advanced in Judaism beyond many of those of my age and generation, abounding more in zeal for the traditions of my fathers. But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me through His grace, to reveal His son to me, that I should preach Him among the non-Jewish nations, I did not immediately consult with flesh and blood, and neither did I go up to Jerusalem, to those who were apostles before me, but I went to Arabia, and then returned again to Damascus. Then, after three years, I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and remained with him for fifteen days. I did not see any of the other apostles, except James, the Lord's brother. The things I am writing to you, before God, I do no lie. Then I went to the regions of Syria and Cilicia. I was unknown in appearance by the churches in Judea, which were in Christ, nevertheless, they had heard: "The one who at one time persecuted us, is now preaching the faith that he once tried to stamp out", and they glorified God because of me.

Then, after fourteen years, I went up to Jerusalem again, this time taking Barnabas and Titus with me. I went according to a revelation, to share with them the Gospel I was preaching among the Non-Jews. I spoke privately with those of reputation, to make sure that I was not running, or had not run in vain. But neither Titus, who was with me, although he was a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised. But some false brothers sneaked in secretly to spy out the freedom we have in Christ Jesus, with the intention of driving us back into servitude. But we did not give in to them, or subject ourselves to them even for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might remain with you.

But from those who seemed to be something - whatever they were at one time does not concern me; God is no respector of persons - that is to say, those who seemed to be in charge added nothing to my message. But, on the contrary, when they saw that the Good News to the Non-Jews had been entrusted to me, just as that of the circumcision to Peter - for he who worked in Peter the apostleship to the circumcision, was also working in me among the Non-Jews. When they recognised the grace which had been given to me, James, Cephas and John, all of whom seemed to be pillars, gave Barnabas and I the right hand of fellowship, with the understanding that we would go to the Non-Jews and they to the circumcision - only that we should remember the poor, the very thing I was also eager to do.

But when Cephas came to Antioch, I resisted him to his face, for his behaviour was reprehensible. Before some came from James, he ate with the Non-Jews, but when they had come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing those who were of the circumcision. The rest of the Jews consented to this hypocracy, so that even Barnabas was mislead by their pretense. But when I saw that they were not walking uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel, I said to Cephas in front of everyone: "If you, being a Jew, live as a Non-Jew and not a Jew, how is it that you are compelling the Non-Jews to live as Jews?"

We are Jews by nature, and not gentile transgressors, and we know that a man is not justified by performing the works of the Law, but by faith in Jesus Christ; and we who believe in the Messiah Jesus, believe that we are justified through faith in Christ, and not by the works of the Law, for no one is justified by the works of the Law.

But what if, seeking to be justified in Christ, we are found ourselves to be trangressors, does that make Christ a servant of sin. Certainly not! For if I attempt to rebuild that which I have destroyed, I make myself a transgressor. For through the Law I am dead to the Law, that I might live for Christ. I am fixed to the cross with Christ, and now it is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives within me. The life that I now live this body of flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God; who loved me and handed Himself over in my place; and by so doing, I do not make the grace of God null and void. For if righeousness came through keeping the Law, then Christ died for no reason.

You senseless Galatians, before whose eyes Jesus the Messiah was clearly depicted as crucified. Who has charmed you? I want you to tell me this one thing: did you receive the Spirit by keeping the Law, or by the hearing of faith? Are you so foolish? Having begun in the Spirit, you now want to end with the flesh. Did you suffer so much for no reason? If so, then it was in vain. The one who gave you the Spirit, and did so many wonderful works among you, did He do it because of the keeping of the Law, or by the hearing of faith - or was it just like Abraham, who believed God and it was reputed to him as righteousness. You know then, that it is those who are of faith that are the children of Abraham.

The scripture, forseeing that God would justify the Non-Jews by faith, anounced beforehand to Abraham: "In you all nations shall be blessed." Therefore it is those who are of faith, who are blessed along with faithful Abraham; for whoever are still relying on the  works of the Law, are under a curse, for it is written: "All those who do not continuesouly do all that is written in the book of the Law, are under a curse." For it is clear that no one is justified before God by the Law, for the righteous shall live by faith; but the Law is not of faith, for the one who does the these things, shall live by them.

Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, by being made a curse in our place, for it is written: "Cursed are all who hang on a tree." This is so that the blessing of Abraham might come to the Non-Jews through Christ Jesus, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.

Brothers, I am now speaking in human terms. No one would break or add to a human will that has been properly attested. Now, the promises made to Abraham, were made to his "descendant", singular, not to his "descendants", plural. In other words, the promise was not made to many, but to one - "to your descendant" - and this descendant is Christ the Messiah.

This is what I'm saying: the testament, which was attested by God, proceeded the coming of the Law by four hundred and thirty years. The coming of the Law did not make this promise null and void. For if the succession came from the Law, then it would not be the result of a promise - but God gave it to Abraham through a promise.

Why then the Law? The Law was given because of transgression, until the "descendant" would come, to whom the promise was made - put in order by angels, through the hand of a mediator. Now a mediator implies that there are more then one, but God is one.

Is the Law then against the promises of God? Certainly not! For if a law had been given that could bring life, then righteousnses would certainly have been through the Law. But the conclusion of Scripture is that all are under sin, so that the promise is given by faith to those who believe in Jesus the Christ.

But before faith came we were guarded, enclosed under the Law from that faith which was about to be revealed. And so, the Law was like a guardian that accompanied us until Christ came, so that we might be justified by faith - but now that faith has come, we are no longer under the guardian. For all are children of God through faith in Christ Jesus, and all who have been baptised into Christ have put on Christ.

There is no longer Jew or Greek, slave or free, male or female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus, and if you are Christ's then you are descendants of Abraham, his heirs and successors, according to the promise.

This is what I am saying: As long as the heir is under age, he is no different to a servant, even though he is the master of everything. He is under tutors and governors until the time decided by his father. And so it was also with us. When we were under age we were still under the influence of the rudimentary elements of the world. But when we came of age, God sent His Son, born of a woman, born under the Law, to redeem those under the Law so that we might be adopted as sons, and because we are sons, God send the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying "Abba Father!" So you are no longer a servant but a son, and if a son, then you are an heir through God.

But then, being ignorant of God, you served those who by nature are not gods; but now that you have known God, or rather that you are known by God, how is it that you have turned again to the weak and worthless rudimentary things which you want to serve again as before? You observe days, months, seasons and years. I fear for you, that perhaps I have laboured amoung you for nothing. Brothers, I implore you, be just like I am, and I just like you. You have done me no harm, for you know that it was because of a sickness of the body that I preached the Good News to you in the first place. And although this caused you distress, you did not despise or reject me, but you received me as a messenger from God, just as you would Christ Jesus.

What has now become of your blessed attitude? For I bear witness, that you would, if possibe, have even plucked out your own eyes and given them to me. Have I now become your enemy because I tell you the truth? Your enthusiasm for them is not good. They want to exclude you, so that you imitate them. It is good to be enthusiastic about good things, and not only when I am present with you. 

My little children, for whom I am again suffering the pains of childbirth, until Christ is fully formed in you. I would very much like to be with you now, and change my tone, but I have my doubts about you. Tell me, those of you who want to be under the Law: have you not paid attention to the Law? For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the maid servant and one by the free woman. The one born of the maid servant was born as a result of the natural process of conception, but the one born of the free woman was born as a result of a promise.

Now this is an allagory. The two women represent two Testaments; The one represents Mount Sinai and servitude. She is Hagar, and she represents Mount Sinai in Arabia, and the present Jerusalem and the servitude of her children.

But the Jerusalem that is above is free, and she is our Mother. For it is written: Rejoice, you who are sterile and have not given birth, break forth and shout, you who are not in labour, for the children of the one who is abandoned, are more than the one who has a husband. 

But you, brothers, are children according to the promise given to Isaac. But just as then, the one who had been born by natural means, persecuted the one born according of the Spirit, so it is now. But what does the Scripture say? Cast out the maid servant and her son, for the son of the maid servant shall not inherit together with the son of the free woman. And so, brothers, we are not children of the maid servant, but of the free woman.

Stand, therefore, in the liberty by which Chrirst has liberated us, and do not be held back again by the yoke of servitude. Now, pay attention. I, Paul, say to you, that if you allow yourselves to be circumcised, Christ will be of no use to you. Again I solemnly assert, that if any man allows himself to be circumcised, he puts himself under the obligation to keep the whole Law. Those who attempt to be justified by the Law, remove themselves from Christ and are cut off from grace.

But we wait for the hope of righteousness by faith through the Spirit. For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision is of any value, but faith working through love. You have run well. Who is now is preventing you from obeying the truth? This persuasion is not from the one who called you. A little yeast spoils the whole lump. 

I have confidence in you and the Lord, that you will be of no other persuasion. The one who is troubeling you will have to bear his judement, whoever he is.

But if I, brothers, still preached circumcision, why do I still suffer persecution, for the sumbling block of the cross would be removed. I wish those who are troubeling you, would themselves be cut off.

But you are called to liberty, brothers, only do not allow this liberty to provide an occasion for the sinful nature, but through love serve one another. For the whole Law is summed up in this one saying: "love your neighbour as yourself." But if you bite and devour one another, be careful that you are not consumed by one another. 

This is what I am saying: walk by the Spirit and you will not fulfil the longings of the sinful nature. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit and the Spirit against the flesh, for these oppose one another, preventing you from doing the things you want to do. But if you allow the Spirit to lead you, you are not under the Law.

